---
layout: article
---

## brief C++ history

TODO

## C++ philosophy

C++ relies on two core pillars:

- direct contact with the hardware (no hidden implementation, ability to use pointers and access memory directly)
- zero- and low-overhead abstraction

C++ is a language from experts for experts. Lots of features are unconstrained because it was considered bad to place artificial limitations on them just because they could be misused. Major examples of this are multiple inheritance and operator overloading. In this regard, C++ is the opposite of Java.

Obviously more features come with more power but also more responsibility - assuming you are already experienced with other language(s) you know what is good use and what is abuse.

C++ strives to offer zero-overhead abstraction. Member functions (methods) are as fast as free (global) functions taking reference to object they operate on. Standard library relies heavily on generic programming and very strong compile-time optimizations. Some features are not overhead-free but if you were to code them manually (eg in C) you would still need some way to deal with error handling and/or all corner cases which ultimately has the same overhead ... just more code to write and to make mistakes in.

## maintenance process

C++ is not owned by anyone nor by any company. Language is maintained by ISO SC22 WG21 committee which since 2011 aims to issue new international standard every 3 years. The committee consists of experts from various software and hardware companies including Google, Microsoft, IBM, Intel, Qualcomm, Qt, nVidia and more. It is also strongly connected with people behind the implementation and tooling (eg Microsoft's Visual compiler and the GNU project). There is no entry barrier to the inside and obviously more people are wanted.

Other programming language ISO committees:

- WG1 - PLIP (no longer active)
- WG2 - Pascal (no longer active)
- WG3 - APL (no longer active)
- WG4 - COBOL
- WG5 - Fortran
- WG6 - Algol (no longer active)
- WG7 - PL/I (no longer active)
- WG8 - Basic (no longer active)
- WG9 - Ada
- WG13 - Modula-2 (no longer active)
- WG14 - C
- WG17 - Prolog

It is worth nothing as not so many languages have open process of creation. Many languages that are owned by big corporations (eg C# - Microsoft, Swift - Apple, Java - Oracle) also feature open process but ultimately they are made for the benefit of their company.

Other language featuring similar process which recently gained a lot of popularity (thanks to Google investment) is Python which is maintained by the Python Software Foundation. Rust is also not owned by anyone and completely community-driven. Both are just not as official as C and C++ which go through ISO.

Most of the users of any language do not care much about its maintenance process but there are some niches like universities and military organizations which prefer not to rely on a technology owned by a (foreign country or just any) company.

## C++ ecosystem

### implementations

There are 3 major language implementations:

- GCC (GNU Compiler Collection) from the GNU project (under Free Software Foundation) (the de facto standard C and C++ compiler on any Linux distribution)
- Clang from LLVM project
- MSVC (Microsoft Visual C++ Compiler)

There are/were more but they are either abandoned or are significantly behind current language standard.

The state of implementations leads to 2 most common toolchains:

- Windows + Microsoft Visual Studio + nmake build system (Visual Studio project files)
- Linux or other unix-like OS + GCC + independent IDE/editor (Qt Creator, Eclipse, KDevelop, Visual Studio Code, CLion, Vim) and other tools (Valgrind, clang-tidy) + GNU make build system (manually written makefiles or generated by CMake)

### dependency management

As strange as it might sound, there is no strong or uniform package management for C and/or C++. Dealing with dependencies is a hard topic, especially when your project uses a different build system than the required library.

OS package managers (apt, yum etc) help a lot in this regard by automatically installing compiled library code and necessary header files but they do not help with things like distribution, licence checking or propagating dependencies.

The most commonly used tool is CMake which is a build system generator. Any sizeable/recognizable library has support for it because CMake can generate makefiles for any compiler and also stuff like project files for some IDEs (eg Visual Studio and Xcode).

Since few years dependency management is a hot topic in the C++ community, the upcoming (2020) language standard brings modules which are a modern alternative to the very old header/source build model and allow better tooling.

### convention

C++ Core Guidelines are to C++ what is PEP8 to Python. This is a relatively new project but it's being done by core C++ creators (Bjarne Stroustrup, Herb Sutter) and is meant to establish a set of good practices when writing C++ and also end any inconsistencies such as naming style problems or abuses of certain language features.

This tutorial is fully compliant with Core Guidlines.
