# why I hate Windows API

Note: the following article is very subjective and represents only author's personal opinion. Do not take it as an incentive to completely abandon Windows API (in fact, if you are developing on Windows you or your dependencies simply can't get away of it). Take it as a humorous article which showcases a lot of honest criticizm towards it's design. The article might aswell be named "why I consider Windows API to be an abonimation".

## MACROS

WINDOWS API IS FULL OF MACROS. IT IS SO MUCH FULL OF MACROS THAT ORDINARY CODE THAT USES IT DOESN'T LOOK MUCH DIFFERENT FROM THIS TEXT. YOU MAY ASK - WHY DOES IT HAVE SO MUCH MACROS? THE SAD TRUTH IS THAT WINDOWS API DATES BACK TO TIMES EVEN BEFORE C HAD `typedef` OR `const` SO THE ONLY WAY TO ALIAS A TYPE NAME WAS TEXT REPLACEMENT. AT LEAST YOU CAN THANK MICROSOFT FOR 40 YEARS BACKWARDS COMPATIBILITY THE NEXT TIME YOU WRITE `HRESULT`, `BOOL`, `PVOID`, `LPCSTR` OR SOMETHING ELSE.

## THE `min`/`max` ISSUE

SURPRISE. THERE ARE ACTUALLY SOME MACROS THAT ARE NOT UPPERCASE. IF YOU EVER TRIED TO COMPILE CODE LIKE `std::min(x, y)` AND RECEIVED A LOT OF WEIRD SYNTAX ERRORS YOU KNOW WHAT HAS HAPPENED.

WHAT'S EVEN FUNNIER IS THE FACT THAT IF YOU ADDED (TODO NO MINMAX) BFORE INCLUDING *THE CURSED HEADER* TO DISABLE THESE MACROS, MSVC CODEGEN HAD A BUG WHICH CAUSED IT TO EMIT CODE THAT RUNS SLOWER THAN THE EQUIVALENT GENERATED BY THE USE OF MACROS. FORTUNATELY, IT WAS FIXED IN (TODO).

## Hungarian notation

TODO

## Unicode support

UTF-16 as default unicode encoding was a mistake. But Microsoft was first to support it so we can't blame them for this decision. They simply were not aware of the consequences.

You may ask - what's the problem with it?

- UTF-16 is endianess dependent - there is actually UTF-16LE and UTF-16BE (UTF-8 is not endianess dependent)
- Majority of non-Windows software uses UTF-8
- UTF-8 and UTF-32 yield the same order when sorted lexicographically. UTF-16 does not.
- In both UTF-8 and UTF-16 encodings, code points may take up to 4 bytes. However, UTF-16 is often misused as a fixed-width encoding (assuming every code point is 2 bytes), even by the Windows package programs themselves: in plain Windows edit control (until Vista), it takes two backspaces to delete a character which takes 4 bytes in UTF-16. On Windows 7, the console displays such characters as two invalid characters, regardless of the font being used even though these 4 bytes actually represent 1 code point (character).
- ANSII encoding is a strict subset of UTF-8. Any program that treats strings as opaque data type and (without modifications) only passes them around (such as most utilities in POSIX shell) between other APIs expecting sequences of bytes automatically works with UTF-8 if it works with ANSII. In other words, if you write a program that is intended to work only with ANSII encoding, but the strings go in route UTF-8 API <=> your code <=> UTF-8 API your program automatically works with UTF-8

## `wchar_t`

`sizeof(wchar_t)` is 4 bytes on every platform. Except Windows, on which it is 2.

- It’s impossible to open a file with a Unicode name on MSVC using standard features of C++. It works because Microsoft added an extension that accepts wide strings.

TODO anything more to say??? Don't use this type?

## main function

TODO verify the statement below

It's 2019 and Microsoft still doesn't support `int main(int argc, char** argv)` for unicode-aware applications. You have to use `BOOL WINAPI WinMain(TODO)` to compile the program.

Note: this problem does not happen on Windows GCC forks (eg MinGW), they will always allow you to use standard C and C++ main functions but perform some data convertion shenanigans when launching the executable. The compiled binary still has a reference to `WinMain@16`, it just has a wrapper between it and the actual main function.

___

Sources (for verification or further reading):

http://utf8everywhere.org/
